# Clinical Guidelines: Pancreatitis

Condensed from peer-reviewed guidelines (PubMed, NICE). Sections most relevant to diagnostic workup and treatment.


---

## NICE: Pancreatitis
*Pancreatitis* (nice)

# Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your care.
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.

# Acute pancreatitis
People with acute pancreatitis usually present with sudden-onset abdominal pain. Nausea and vomiting are often present and there may be a history of gallstones or excessive alcohol intake. Typical physical signs include epigastric tenderness, fever and tachycardia. Diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is confirmed by testing blood lipase or amylase levels, which are usually raised. If raised levels are not found, abdominal CT may confirm pancreatic inflammation.

## Referral for specialist treatment
If a person develops necrotic, infective, haemorrhagic or systemic complications of acute pancreatitis:
seek advice from a specialist pancreatic centre within the referral network and
discuss whether to move the person to the specialist centre for treatment of the complications.
When managing acute pancreatitis in children:
seek advice from a paediatric gastroenterology or hepatology unit and a specialist pancreatic centre and
discuss whether to move the child to the specialist centre.

## Moderately severe acute pancreatitis
Moderately severe acute pancreatitis is characterised by organ failure that resolves within 48 hours (transient organ failure), or local or systemic complications in the absence of persistent organ failure (as defined by the revised Atlanta classification published in GUT).

## Severe acute pancreatitis
Severe acute pancreatitis is characterised by single or multiple organ failure that persists for more than 48 hours (persistent organ failure; as defined by the revised Atlanta classification).

# Diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis
In people with suspected (or under investigation for) chronic pancreatitis, whose diagnosis has not been confirmed by the use of 'first‑line' tests (for example, CT scan, ultrasound scan, upper gastrointestinal  endoscopy or combinations of these), what is the accuracy of magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) with or without secretin and endoscopic ultrasound to identify whether chronic pancreatitis is present?

# Speed of intravenous fluid resuscitation for people with acute pancreatitis
What is the most clinically effective and cost-effective speed of administration of intravenous fluid for resuscitation in people with acute pancreatitis?

# Pain management: chronic pancreatitis
Is the long-term use of opioids more clinically effective and cost effective than non-opioid analgesia (including non-pharmacological analgesia) in people with chronic pain due to chronic pancreatitis?

# Pain management: small duct disease
What is the most clinically effective and cost-effective intervention for managing small duct disease (in the absence of pancreatic duct obstruction, inflammatory mass or pseudocyst) in people with chronic pancreatitis presenting with pain?

# Management of type 3c diabetes
What is the most clinically effective and cost-effective insulin regimen to minimise hypo- and hyperglycaemia for type 3c diabetes secondary to pancreatitis?

---

## JPN: Diagnostic Criteria
*JPN Guidelines for the management of acute pancreatitis: diagnostic criteria for acute pancreatitis* (pubmed)

## It is essential to interview all patients (including those with consciousness disorders or who are in a state of shock), take their medical histories, and perform a physical examination (recommendation a)
Abdominal pain, pain radiating to the back, anorexia, fever, nausea and vomiting, and decreased bowel sounds are frequent manifestations of acute pancreatitis (Tables 1 and 2) (Level 4). 1,2 However, these features are not specific to acute pancreatitis, and when a patient presents with these manifestations, acute pancreatitis must be differentiated from other acute abdominal diseases. Acute pancreatitis accounts for 2% to 3% of all acute abdominal diseases (Level 2b, unknown) 3,4 and in a very few patients there is no abdominal pain (Level 2b). 5 tis are 85% to 100% and 84.7% to 99.0% (Level 2a), [bib_ref] Lipase and pancreatic amylase activities in tissues and in patients with hyperamylasemia, Apple [/bib_ref] respectively. The blood lipase value is more sensitive than blood amylase (Levels 2b-4) 11-13 and provides diagnostic capability similar to that of blood P-amylase (Level 2b). [bib_ref] Normal amylase levels in the presentation of acute pancreatitis, Orebaugh [/bib_ref] Blood lipase is considered a valuable diagnostic tool, because abnormally high values persist for longer than abnormal blood amylase levels (Level 2b), [bib_ref] Serum lipase: a better test to diagnose acute alcoholic pancreatitis, Gumaste [/bib_ref] and it is more sensitive in terms of detecting the presence of acute alcohol-induced pancreatitis. The combined use of blood amylase and blood lipase levels (Level 2a) [bib_ref] Lipase and pancreatic amylase activities in tissues and in patients with hyperamylasemia, Apple [/bib_ref] does not facilitate the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis.
The above findings lead to the conclusion that the blood lipase level is an important indicator in the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis and that the measurement of the blood lipase level should be given top priority. Measurement of the lipase level is of primary importance when the blood amylase level of a patient suspected of having acute pancreatitis is normal.

## Identifying an increase in the level of pancreatic enzymes in the blood is a pivotal factor in the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis (recommendation a)
When the cutoff blood amylase level is set at the upper limit of normal, it has a sensitivity of 91.7% to 100% and a specificity of 71.6% to 97.6% for the diagnosis of acute pancreatitis. If the cutoff level is set higher, specificity Acute pancreatitis is sometimes manifested by discoloration of the skin, such as Grey Turner's sign (on the lateral abdominal wall), Cullen's sign (around the navel), and Fox's sign (over the lower portion of the inguinal ligament). However, because these signs appear in only 3% (Level 2b) [bib_ref] The incidence and prognosis of body wall ecchymosis in acute pancreatitis, Dickson [/bib_ref] of patients, and because they are also observed in patients with other diseases (Level 4) 7 and are often seen 48 to 72 h after the onset of pancreatitis, their diagnostic significance is low.

## When making a diagnosis of acute pancreatitis or a differential diagnosis from other diseases, the blood lipase level is the best pancreatic enzyme parameter, even better than the total blood amylase level (recommendation a)
Comparisons of measurements of various pancreatic enzymes to detect the presence of acute pancreatitis (Level 2a) [bib_ref] Lipase and pancreatic amylase activities in tissues and in patients with hyperamylasemia, Apple [/bib_ref] have shown that the blood lipase level is almost as sensitive as the total blood amylase level and has better specificity [fig_ref] Table 3: Comparison of diagnostic tests for acute pancreatitis [/fig_ref]. [bib_ref] Evaluating tests for acute pancreatitis, Agarwal [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Diagnosis of acute pancreatitis: a proposed sequence of biochemical investigations, Thomson [/bib_ref] According to Apple et al., [bib_ref] Lipase and pancreatic amylase activities in tissues and in patients with hyperamylasemia, Apple [/bib_ref] the sensitivity and specificity of blood lipase in the diagnosis of acute pancreati- improves, but sensitivity declines. When the cutoff level is set at 1000 IU/l, specificity improves to 100%, but sensitivity declines to 60.9% (Levels 2a-4;. [bib_ref] Evaluating tests for acute pancreatitis, Agarwal [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Correlation of serum amylase levels with pancreatic pathology and pancreatitis etiology, Nordestgaard [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Diagnostic assays in acute pancreatitis. A study of sensitivity and specificity, Steinberg [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] A rapid assay for serum immunoreactive lipase as a screening test for..., Ventrucci [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Diagnostic value of routine isoamylase assay of hyperamylasemic serum, Koehler [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Acute pancreatitis and normoamylasemia. Not an uncommon combination, Clavien [/bib_ref] Sensitivity declines because (1) the blood amylase level does not rise as much in many patients with chronic alcoholic pancreatitis with acute exacerbations as it does in patients with acute pancreatitis (Level 2b) 12,20 and (2) since the elevated blood amylase level declines almost immediately and is maintained for a shorter time than are other elevated pancreatic enzyme levels, the level must be measured soon after the onset (Levels 3b-4). [bib_ref] Serum pancreatic enzyme behavior during the course of acute pancreatitis, Ventrucci [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Hyperlipidemic pancreatitis, Toskes [/bib_ref] The blood amylase level seldom rises in acute pancreatitis caused by hyperlipidemia (Level 3b). [bib_ref] Amylase and lipase in the emergency department evaluation of acute pancreatitis, Vissers [/bib_ref] Because many other diseases besides pancreatitis are associated with hyperamylasemia [fig_ref] Table 6: Conditions associated with elevation of serum amylase [/fig_ref] ; Level 2a), [bib_ref] Lipase and pa
[...truncated...]

---

## JPN: Severity Assessment
*JPN Guidelines for the management of acute pancreatitis: severity assessment of acute pancreatitis* (pubmed)

## Severity assessment is essential to the selection of appropriate initial treatment. even acute pancreatitis that is initially diagnosed as mild or moderate may quickly progress to severe, and continuous assessment is required, particularly during the first 3 days after onset (recommendation a)
To improve the survival rate in patients with acute pancreatitis, severity assessment during the initial examination is extremely important to ensure the quick and accurate diagnosis of severe cases (which have a high mortality rate), to commence appropriate initial treatment, and, if necessary, to transfer the patient to an advanced specialist medical institution. Because quite a few cases initially diagnosed as mild acute pancreatitis may progress to severe acute pancreatitis, serial assessments of severity should be performed. It is also impor-tant to monitor the effects of treatment by serial assessments of severity. When deciding on an appropriate system of criteria to assess the severity of pancreatitis, it is important to establish whether the assessment (1) depends on an examination method that is available at most medical institutions, [bib_ref] Guide to development of practice guidelines, Kish [/bib_ref] can be used to assess severity shortly after admission to the hospital, and (3) can be used to monitor the course of the disease, and can be preformed repeatedly.

## Severity scores
CQ2. Are severity scoring systems (JPN score, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation [APACHE] II score) useful for assessing the severity of acute pancreatitis?

## Evaluation of severity scores
Ranson score and Glasgow score The Ranson and Glasgow scoring systems are based mainly on examination findings and have a sensitivity of between 70% and 80% for predicting a poor outcome (Levels 1b-2b). [bib_ref] Prognostic signs and the role of operative management in acute pancreatitis, Ranson [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Etiological and prognostic factors in human acute pancreatitis: a review, Ranson [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Prognostic factors in acute pancreatitis, Blamey [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Prognostic signs and nonoperative peritoneal lavage in acute pancreatitis, Ranson [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Comparison of three Glasgow multifactor prognostic scoring systems in acute pancreatitis, Leese [/bib_ref] Metaanalysis (prediction of a poor outcome) suggested that the Ranson and Glasgow scores were almost equal as assessment criteria, but neither of them were satisfactory (Level 1a). 14,15 Both require 48 h to complete assessments.

## Because acute pancreatitis is manifested by a wide range of clinical signs, it is difficult to evaluate them objectively as parameters for use in severity assessment.
Patients exhibiting manifestations of vital organ failure, such as shock, psychoneurotic symptoms, and abdominal distention (ileus, ascites), are assessed as having severe acute pancreatits, and these manifestations have been used as parameters for reported severity assessment criteria. [bib_ref] A single-centre double-blind trial of Trasylol therapy in primary acute pancreatitis, Imrie [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Risk factors in acute pancreatitis, Bank [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Die konservative Behandlung der Pankreaserkrankungen, Forell [/bib_ref] Five conditions -shock, dyspnea, neurotic symptoms, severe infection, and bleeding tendency (including that manifested by Grey-Turner's sign and Cullen's sign) -are considered to be associated with a prognosis for survival. [bib_ref] Development and use of a new staging system for severe acute pancreatitis..., Ogawa [/bib_ref] Analysis of different severity assessment criteria has revealed that criteria based on clinical findings have a sensitivity of 54.7%, a specificity of 93.0%, and a positive predictive value of 59.2%, while criteria based on examination findings have a sensitivity of 69.3%, a specificity of 79.5%, and a positive predictive value of 77.1% (Level 1a). [bib_ref] Discriminant power and information content of Ranson's prognostic signs in acute pancreatitis:..., Bernardinis [/bib_ref] This suggests that clinical findings alone are not reliable for severity assessment, and that further investigation is required, because both clinical and examination findings have advantages and disadvantages.
Abdominal findings in the form of color marks on the skin, e.g., Grey-Turner's sign, Cullen's sign, and Fox's sign, are indicative of a poor outcome and high mortality, 23,24 but they do not necessarily reflect severity. [bib_ref] Diagnosis, objective assessment of severity, and management of acute pancreatitis, Dervenis [/bib_ref] The value of the color marks for severity assessment remains obscure, and, because they often appear 48 to 72 h after the onset of pancreatitis, their significance as an early predictor of poor outcome is low.
The 1992 Atlanta Symposium, [bib_ref] A clinically based classification system for acute pancreatitis, Bradley [/bib_ref] an international conference that examined severity assessment of acute pancreatitis, suggested that clinical organ failure (respiration, circulatory, and kidney failure) was an indicator of severe pancreatitis, while the guidelines of the British Society of Gastroenterology 20 state that clinical assessment alone is unreliable and will misclassify around 50% of patients (Level 2b). [bib_ref] Prediction of severity in acute pancreatitis: prospective comparison of three prognostic indices, Corfield [/bib_ref] The Santorini Consensus Conference in 1999 [bib_ref] Diagnosis, objective assessmen
[...truncated...]

## Serum crp values are useful for severity assessment, but they may not reflect severity within the first 48 h after onset (recommendation a)
Serum CRP values are a sensitive predictor of the progression of severity from moderate to severe. The time of measurement and the CRP values vary with different investigations and researchers. In one report, the cutoff value within the first 48 h of onset was greater than 30 mg/dl (Level 1c),
[...truncated...]

---

## JPN: Medical Management
*JPN Guidelines for the management of acute pancreatitis: medical management of acute pancreatitis* (pubmed)

## Principles of medical management for acute pancreatitis
Clinical question (CQ) 1. Is adequate fluid replacement crucial in the management of acute pancreatitis?

## An adequate volume of intravenous fluid should be promptly administered to correct the volume deficit and maintain basal fluid requirements (recommendation a)
Increased vascular permeability in acute pancreatitis causes the loss of intravenous fluid and reduces plasma volume. In severe cases, in patients with massive ascites, pleural effusion, and retroperitoneal and mesenteric edema, circulating plasma volume decreases markedly. Hypovolemia may lead to shock and acute renal failure, and, because hypovolemic shock may impair the pan-creatic microcirculation and promote pancreatic ischemia and necrosis, restoration and maintenance of plasma volume is crucial in severe acute pancreatitis.
An adequate volume of intravenous fluid should be promptly administered to correct the volume deficit and maintain basal fluid requirements. Balanced electrolyte solutions, such as Ringer's lactate, are recommended to stabilize the cardiovascular system. The infusion volume should be decided while monitoring blood pressure, heart rate, hematocrit, and urine output. Calcium and potassium chloride should be replaced if deficiencies arise. Hyperglycemia is managed with insulin as needed. In patients with severe acute pancreatitis, continuous monitoring of central venous pressure or pulmonary wedge pressure, blood gas analysis, and electrolyte measurement is crucial to determining the adequate volume that must be replaced. Oxygen is administered as needed to maintain at least 95% oxygen saturation. Fluid infusion may be complicated by pulmonary edema due to an increase in lung water and is an indication for artificial ventilation.

## Acute pancreatitis is accompanied by persistent severe abdominal pain. analgesia is crucial (recommendation a)
The pain associated with acute pancreatitis may cause anxiety in patients and adversely affect their clinical course; this may include respiratory distress, which should be relieved shortly after it develops. The nonnarcotic analgesic buprenorphine has an effect superior to procaine, and, unlike procaine, it does not exacerbate the pathology of acute pancreatitis by including contracting the sphincter of Oddi (Level 1b). [bib_ref] Buprenorphine or procaine for pain relief in acute pancreatitis. A prospective randomized..., Jakobs [/bib_ref] Buprenorphine has an analgesic effect similar to that of pethidine (Level 1b). 3

## Nasogastric suction through a nasogastric tube is unnecessary in patients with acute pancreatitis unless the disease is associated with paralytic ileus and/or frequent vomiting. h2 blockers are also unnecessary unless a stress ulcer develops (recommendation d)
There are no definitive studies in humans to support the opinion that nasogastric suction is useful to the pancreas at rest in patients with acute pancreatitis. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in patients with mild to moderate acute pancreatitis have shown no ameliorating effect of gastric suction on the clinical course by, for example, alleviating pain or shortening the hospital stay. [bib_ref] Nasogastric suction in the treatment of alcoholic pancreatitis. A controlled study, Levant [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Is nasogastric suction necessary in acute pancreatitis?, Naeije [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Nasogastric suction in alcoholic pancreatitis, Field [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] An evaluation of the efficacy of nasogastric suction treatment in alcoholic pancreatitis, Fuller [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Treatment of acute alcoholic pancreatitis: the roles of cimetidine and nasogastric suction, Loiudice [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Prospective, randomized trial of nasogastric suction in patients with acute pancreatitis, Sarr [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Comparison of fasting, nasogastric suction and cimetidine in the treatment of acute..., Navarro [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] A randomized trial comparing cimetidine to nasogastric suction in acute pancreatitis, Goff [/bib_ref] Rather, there are some reports claiming that nasogastric suction may prolong the period of abdominal pain and nausea. [bib_ref] An evaluation of the efficacy of nasogastric suction treatment in alcoholic pancreatitis, Fuller [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Treatment of acute alcoholic pancreatitis: the roles of cimetidine and nasogastric suction, Loiudice [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Prospective, randomized trial of nasogastric suction in patients with acute pancreatitis, Sarr [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Comparison of fasting, nasogastric suction and cimetidine in the treatment of acute..., Navarro [/bib_ref] The placement of a nasogastric tube in patients with acute pancreatitis is unnecessary unless the disease is associated with paralytic ileus and/ or frequent vomiting. There are no reports suggesting that cimetidine, an H2 blocker, might ameliorate the clinical course of acute pancreatitis; 10,12-15 however, treatment with an H2 blocker should be considered when a patient with acute pancreatitis develops a stress ulcer or acute gastric mucosal lesion.

## Continuous intravenous infusion of a large dose of a protease inhibitor reduces the incidence of complications in the early phase of severe acute pancreatitis (recommendation b)
In the 1960s, the protease inhibitor aprotinin was widely used to treat severe acute pancreatitis, but the drug failed to demonstrate clinical efficacy in three RCTs (Level 1b). [bib_ref] Treatment of acute pancreatitis with Trasylol: report of a controlled therapeutic trial, Skyring [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] Double-blind controlled clinical trial of Trasylol. Preliminary results in acute pancreatitis and..., Baden [/bib_ref] [bib_ref] A single-centre double-blind trial of Trasylol therapy in primary acute pancreatitis, Imrie [/bib_ref] The efficacy of the synthetic protease inhibitor gabexate mesilate was investigated in five RCTs (Level 1b), 19-23 but a metaanalysis 24 of four of them [bib_ref] Multicen
[...truncated...]

---

## JPN: Gallstone-Induced
*JPN Guidelines for the management of acute pancreatitis: treatment of gallstone-induced acute pancreatitis* (pubmed)

## Key words gallstone pancreatitis · emergency endoscopy · laparoscopic cholecystectomy
Offprint requests to: Y. Kimura * President, Japanese Society of Emergency Abdominal Medicine; President, Japanese Society of Hepato-Biliary-Pancreatic Surgery; President, Asian-Pacific Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association ** Chairman, Intractable Pancreatic Disease Investigation and Research Group of the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare *** President, Japan Pancreas Society presents these guidelines (the JPN Guidelines) for the treatment of gallstone-induced acute pancreatitis, citing the relevant Recommendations.

## Management of bile duct stones in gallstoneassociated acute pancreatitis
Clinical questions (CQ) 1. Is an emergency endoscopy approach beneficial in the treatment of gallstone-induced acute pancreatitis?

## An emergency endoscopy approach is beneficial in patients with acute pancreatitis in whom bile duct obstruction is suspected or there are complications from cholangitis (recommendation a)
Emergency endoscopic approaches to the management of bile duct stones in gallstone-associated acute pancreatitis include endoscopic sphincterotomy (ES), endoscopic papillary balloon dilation (EPBD), endoscopic nasobiliary drainage (ENBD), and stenting. Those procedures are performed to remove gallstones and to drain the bile duct, which mostly results in relieving the obstruction of the pancreatic duct. The endoscopic approach seems to be most beneficial in those patients with acute pancreatitis suspected of having concomitant gallstones complicated with the occurrence or exacerbation of jaundice, and in patients complicated by cholangitis. The decision whether or not to perform one-stage choledocholithotomy after ES or endoscopic biliary drainage must be based on the pathophysiological condition of the patient and the skill of the physician. It is important to refer any patient who requires an endoscopic approach to an advanced medical unit if the patient meets the criteria for transfer (see page ).
Emergency or early endoscopic procedures for acute pancreatitis have been assessed in four randomized controlled trials (RCTs; Level 1b), 2-5 and a metaanalysis of these RCTs has been performed (Level 1a). [bib_ref] Meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of endoscopic retrograde cholangiography and endoscopic sphincterotomy..., Sharma [/bib_ref] The metaanalysis involved a total of 834 patients, comprising 460 patients treated by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) followed by ES (ERCP/ES group) and 374 patients treated conservatively (conservative treatment group). The analysis led to the conclusion that the ERCP/ES group had lower incidences of morbidity and mortality [fig_ref] Table 1: Reported morbidity and mortality rates in early ERCP/ES and conservative treatment groups [/fig_ref] , but because pancreatitis patients with treated by ERCP or ES alone have never been analyzed, it remains unclear whether ERCP or ES is more useful.
The results of two studies (Level 1b) 2,3 that published data stratified by severity indicate that ERCP/ES is not very useful in patients with mild pancreatitis, and a report expressing a negative opinion in regard to early endoscopic treatment (Level 1b) 5 excluded patients with jaundice from the analysis, and the percentage of subjects with gallstone pancreatitis was only 19%. It is concluded from these reports that urgent ERCP/ES is useful only in severe gallstone pancreatitis.
However, there are differences in severity assessment, particularly of severe cases, between Japan and Western countries, and no convincing evidence supporting the application of emergency ERCP/ES in patients with severe cases has been established in Japan. It is currently thought that the indications for emergency ERCP/ES should be
[...truncated...]

## Open choledochotomy or sphincterotomy (operative removal of cbd stones is recommended) (recommendation d)
In Japan, choledocholithotripsy with emergency endoscopic procedures (ES, EPBD) is performed by endoscopists, as well as by many surgeons, and it has become the treatment of first choice for CBD clearance. One-stage cholecystectomy and CBD clearance has not been demonstrated to be safer and more effective than endoscopic procedures, and it is not recommended in either the JPN Guidelines or the International Association of Pancreatology (IAP) guidelines. 10

## Laparoscopic cholecystectomy should be considered after recovery from an attack of gallstone pancreatitis and should be performed during the same hospital stay (choledochotomy and cbd clearance are performed as required) (recommendation b)
Cholelithiasis is one of the major causes of acute pancreatitis, and gallstone-induced acute pancreatitis is an absolute indication for cholecystectomy (and choledochotomy, when necessary). However, there has been no consensus regarding the timing of this surgical intervention. One RCT claims that the earlier surgery is performed after onset, the more beneficial it is, while another RCT has proposed delayed surgery once the inflammatory process has subsided. The latter RCT (Level 1b) [bib_ref] Gallstone pancreatitis: biliary tract pathology in relation to time of operation, Stone [/bib_ref] compared earlier surgery (within 72 h of hospital admission) and delayed surgery, and the results suggested that the earlier surgery was more beneficial.
Because the results showed no significant difference in the incidence of complications (8.3% vs 10.3%) or the mortality rate (2.8% vs 6.9%), this RCT concluded that surgery on the bile duct system with the aim of removing the cause of the pancreatitis or preventing its progression could be performed safely even in the acute state. According to another RCT (Level 1b), [bib_ref] Gallstone pancreatitis: a prospective randomized trial of the timing of surgery, Kelly [/bib_ref] which is often quoted as grounds to justify delayed surgery, patients subjected to early surgery (wit
[...truncated...]